---
layout: post
title:  "Test Driven Development with Tensorflow"
tags:
  - practical
  - coding
hero: https://filmot.com/ZLTJo4m.jpg
overlay: orange
published: true
---
(30 min) This post demonstrates how *Test Driven Development (TDD)* applies to
developing Machine Learning frameworks such as Tensorflow
{: .lead}
<!–-break-–>

# 1. Introduction
I came from a data science background, where I frequently see
colleagues or even tech leads writing codes that are not tested at all. Near
the end of a product cycle, the 'prototyped' code/ tensorflow model are dumped
to software engineers, where they are almost always re-written or accepted as
black-box programs. Needless to say, the pain comes when the model is deployed,
code/models naturally break and noone can even tell where things went wrong.
Data science is becoming more and more of an integral part of the team, so
developing bug-free, reproducible code should naturally be part of a data
scientist's job.

*Test Driven Development* or TDD is a development technique where you must
first write a test that **fails** before you write new functional code. It is a
key part of agile software development process. There are ample tutorials
online on how to do TDD, but I cannot find many resources on how to do TDD on
machine learning frameworks such as Tensorflow. Personally, I think a lot of
data scientists come from academia, where rapid prototyping is always prefered
over code quality. This post therefore serves to demonstrate how model
development process can actually be improved by using TDD as part of the
workflow.
